.TH binparse 5 1-24-2016 "binparse 1.x" "BPF File"

.SH Name
.PP
BPF (BinParse Format) File Syntax
.RE

.SH Description
.PP
The BPF file is a specification to the \fBbp(1)\fR utility that describes how to parse a binary file. Data parse points (tags) are defined for each data item of interest.
.RE

.SH Setting Options
.PP
Because BPF files can be set executable and run as a binary (using interpreter magic at the top of the file), command line options need to be set from within the BPF file. This is done with the "setopt" option. The syntax is as follows:

setopt <letter_option> <argument>

The <letter_option> is the letter of each command line option found in \fBbpp(1)\fR. The <argument> is "true" or "false" for boolean options and the option argument for the \fB-f\fR and \fB-p\fR options.

This example turns verbose output on:

setopt v true

This example sets the number of dependency resolution (\fB-p\fR) passes to 7:

setopt p 7

Command line options will take precedence over setopt defined options.
.RE

.SH Defining Parse Points
.PP
Parse points are defined by five mandatory, and one or more optional fields, all on the same BPF line, separated by spaces. The fields are:
.TP
Offset [Required]
This is the distance, in bytes, of the data point from the beginning of the file.
.TP
Size [Required]
This is the size, in bytes, of the data item to be read.
.TP
Tag [Required]
This is an abbreviated (no spaces) name for the data point. This reference can be used in other parse points if there are dependencies in the data.
.TP
Label [Required]
This is a string (can be quoted if it has spaces) that acts as a label for the data item in output. The \fB-l\fR option ignores the label field and uses the tag for this purpose instead. This field can be a string consisting of a single char (such as "-") if the field is not used, but cannot be omitted.
.TP
Data Type [Required]
This is a series of data types that \fBbp\fR supports. See the \fBSupported Data Types\fR section for a listing of types.
.TP
Directives [Optional]
Directives tell how to manage or represent the data. The supported directives are \fBmust=\fR, \fBmask=\fR, \fBenum=\fR, and \fBhidden=\fR. These are explained further in the \fBDirectives\fR section below.
.PP
Offsets and sizes are typically numeric but can be references (/tags pointing) to the results of other parse points and/or mathematical expressions. See the sections on \fBMathematical Expressions\fR and \fBUsing Tags\fR for more information.
.RE

.SH Defining Enums
.PP
Enums are a means of defining string "symbols" to represent values in a field. The following is the syntax used for one of the builtin enums:
setenum enumBool = { 0:False; default:True; }

The syntax is:

setenum <enum_name> = { <value>:<string>; ... }

Where <value> is a number possible for the data type, and <string> is displayed when that number is encountered. This value-string pair syntax can be repeated when separated by the terminating ';' character. One of the value-string pairs must use the value of "default" to define the default value. Order does not matter.

Note that the string should be quoted if it contains spaces.

There are three builtin enums. They are enumBOOL, enumBool, and enumbool. They are largely identical to the enumBool example above, but each has different case rules when printing true or false (as suggested by the names).
.RE

.SH Defining Explicit Tags
.PP
Explicit tags are defined as a means to provide a common value to tags. For example a tag called "datastart" might hold a number or a mathematical equation that determines the offset of data caused by a header. The data items can be retrieved by using "datastart" as a pre-defined offset that contains the size of the header.

Explicit tags use a syntax similar to enums and options. Here is an example of the most basic explicit tag:

settag datastart = 16

A more realistic tag (using a mathematical expression and a tag) might look like this:

settag datastart = ( 8 + hdrsize )
.RE

.SH Using Tags
.PP
Tags are a means to reference data items. In the simple case, tags are used in conjunction with line numbers to reference failures on parse point lines. In the more interesting case, tags can be used as offset and size values.

When tags are used in this capacity (where one data point is dependent on another through a tag reference), the data for the referenced tag must be read first, so that data can be used to determine the "value" of the tag and then use it as an offset or size. This iterative re-evaluation of parse points (as each level of dependency is resolved) is controlled using the \fB-p\fR option.
.RE

.SH Supported Data Types
.PP
\fBbp\fR supports the following data types (all valid strings for the "Data Type" field for a parse point):
.TP
char - One byte. Represented in ASCII (if printable).
.TP
uintX - Where X is 8, 16, 32, or 64.
.TP
intX - Where X is 8, 16, 32, or 64.
.TP
flstr - Fixed length string. (Assumed NOT to be NULL terminated)
.TP
ztstr - Zero terminated string. (Assumed to be NULL terminated)
.PP
The size field in the parse point specification must be consistent with the size of the data. For example, you cannot specify uint64 as the data type with a size of anything but 8. (The only time "casting" of types is allowed is when a parse point is referenced as a tag. As long as the parse point is a numeric type, it can be used referentially in another parse point.)
.RE

.SH Directives
.PP
Directives are not exclusive and can be stacked for particular effects.
.TP
must=<integer>
The must= directive states that the (integer or char) data type must equal a specific value.
.TP
mask=<integer>
This applies an OR mask to the data. With this option, \fBbp\fR can mask off and look at individual bits. mask= can be used with must= and enum=.
.TP
enum=<enum_name>
Defined enums are applied to the parse point through this directive.
.TP
hidden=<true|false>
This toggles printing of the parse point. Dependent parse points may only be used for the offset data and turining off printing output may be desired.
.RE

.SH Mathematical Expressions
.PP
Minimalist mathematical expressions are allowed using the following syntax:

( <entity> <operator> <entity> )

Where <operator> is one of the following: +, -, *, or /. And where <entity> is a number, a tag, or another mathematical expression.

Mathematical expressions can be used inline (inside the parse point definition fields for offset and size), or in an explicit tag definition.
.RE
.SH Caveats
.PP
All BPF items are case sensitive except for hex input and the keywords "true" and "false".
.RE

.SH See Also
.PP
\fBbp(1)\fR
.RE
 
